plans/protocol-v2-four-action-simplification.md, before:

# Protocol v2: Simplified 4-Action System

- Owner: @lox
- Status: completed
- Updated: 2025-10-01
- Tags: protocol, breaking-change, dx, bot-framework
- Scope: internal/server/hand_runner.go, internal/game/betting.go, internal/client/client.go, sdk/bots/*, docs/websocket-protocol.md
- Risk: medium
- Effort: M

## TL;DR

- Problem: Bots must reimplement context-dependent action name mapping (check vs call, bet vs raise, allin detection) causing catastrophic performance loss when wrong.
- Approach: Simplify protocol to 4 actions (fold, call, raise, allin); server interprets based on game state and logs semantically (check/bet/call/raise).
- Expected outcome: Bot developers focus on strategy rather than protocol bookkeeping; cleaner API with one-time breaking change during v1.0 window.

## Goals

- Simplify protocol to 4 actions: fold, call, raise, allin (remove check, bet from wire protocol)
- Update valid_actions to only send simplified vocabulary (never send check/bet)
- Server normalizes client actions to semantic names (check/bet/call/raise) for internal processing and logging
- Maintain semantic precision in logs, hand histories, and player_action broadcasts for analysis
- Update all internal bots and CLI client to use simplified protocol
- Update documentation to reflect v2 protocol
- Clean breaking change during v1.0 adoption window

## Non-Goals

- Modifying hand history analysis or logging format (logs continue showing semantic check/bet/call/raise)
- Changing other server-to-client messages (hand_start, player_action, etc. unchanged)

## Design Evolution

**Initial approach:** Clean breaking change with no version negotiation.

**Final approach:** After discussion, implemented protocol version negotiation to support gradual migration:
- v2 (default): Simplified 4-action protocol for new bots
- v1 (legacy): Full 6-action protocol for backward compatibility
- Server handles both protocols simultaneously via `bot.ProtocolVersion` field

This allows existing bots to continue working while new bots benefit from simplified protocol.

## Plan

- Step 1: Write failing tests for GetValidActions() returning simplified vocabulary
- Step 2: Update GetValidActions() in betting.go to emit simplified action vocabulary (call/raise instead of check/bet)
- Step 3: Write failing tests for normalizeAction() covering all edge cases
- Step 4: Implement normalizeAction() in hand_runner.go that maps client actions to semantic names
- Step 5: Update convertAction() to use normalizeAction() and handle semantic action names
- Step 6: Update all 4 internal bots to use simplified protocol (call/raise instead of check/bet)
- Step 7: Update CLI client validation and shortcuts to use simplified protocol
- Step 8: Update docs/websocket-protocol.md with v2 protocol and migration guide
- Step 9: Run full test suite and regression tests to verify correctness

## Acceptance Criteria

- GetValidActions() returns only simplified vocabulary: fold, call, raise, allin (never check or bet)
- normalizeAction() correctly maps: call+to_call=0→check, raise+to_call=0→bet, raise+amount>=stack→allin
- player_action broadcasts continue using semantic names (check/bet shown in logs and to other bots)
- All unit tests pass after updates
- All integration tests pass after updates
- CLI client can send simplified actions and validates against new valid_actions
- Regression test: pokerforbots spawn --hand-limit 10000 shows zero invalid actions
- Old action names ("check", "bet") explicitly rejected with clear error message
- Documentation includes migration guide for external bots (Aragorn)

## Risks & Mitigations

- Risk: Wire-level breaking change affects all external bots — Mitigation: Aragorn team already aligned; simple migration (find-replace check→call, bet→raise)
- Risk: valid_actions change breaks existing client-side validation — Mitigation: Update CLI client in same commit; comprehensive testing before merge
- Risk: Server complexity increase — Mitigation: Clean separation between wire protocol (4 actions) and game semantics (6 actions); Red→Green→Refactor with tests first

## Tasks

### ✅ Phase 1: Core Protocol Implementation (Completed)
- [x] Update plan to reflect v2 protocol breaking change and address Codex feedback
- [x] Write failing tests for GetValidActions() returning simplified vocabulary
- [x] Update GetValidActions() in internal/game/betting.go to pass tests
- [x] Write failing tests for normalizeAction() covering all edge cases
- [x] Implement normalizeAction() in internal/server/hand_runner.go to pass tests
- [x] Update convertAction() to use normalization and handle semantic actions
- [x] Update sdk/bots/callingstation to use call/raise
- [x] Update sdk/bots/random to use call/raise
- [x] Update sdk/bots/aggressive to use call/raise
- [x] Update sdk/bots/complex to use call/raise

### ✅ Phase 2: Version Negotiation Infrastructure (Completed)
- [x] Add protocol_version field to Connect message (protocol/messages.go)
- [x] Update Bot struct to store ProtocolVersion (internal/server/bot.go)
- [x] Server validates and stores protocol version on connect (internal/server/server.go)
- [x] Default to v2 if protocol_version omitted

### ✅ Phase 3: Dual Protocol Support (Completed)
- [x] Implement normalizeActionV1() for legacy bots
  - Accept old vocabulary: check, bet, call, raise, fold, allin
  - Direct 1:1 mapping to game.Action
  - Location: internal/server/hand_runner.go

- [x] Implement normalizeActionV2() (rename current normalizeAction)
  - Renamed normalizeAction to normalizeActionV2
  - Handles call→check, raise→bet normalization

- [x] Update convertAction() to dispatch based on bot.ProtocolVersion
  - Implemented version-based dispatch
  - v1 bots use normalizeActionV1
  - v2 bots use normalizeActionV2

- [x] Update sendActionRequest() to convert valid_actions by protocol version
  - Implemented convertActionsForProtocol helper
  - v2 bots receive simplified vocabulary (call/raise)
  - v1 bots receive semantic vocabulary (check/bet/call/raise)

- [x] Add tests for dual normalization
  - TestNormalizeActionProtocolV1 - tests v1 action handling
  - TestNormalizeActionProtocolV2 - tests v2 action handling
  - TestConvertActionsForProtocol - tests valid_actions conversion

### ✅ Phase 4: Documentation & Client Updates (Completed)
- [x] Update SDK client to send protocol_version: "2" (sdk/client/bot.go)
- [x] Update CLI client to use protocol v2 (internal/client/client.go)
  - Send protocol_version in connect
  - Updated keyboard shortcuts (k→call, b→raise for v2 compatibility)
- [x] Update docs/websocket-protocol.md
  - Documented protocol_version field
  - Explained version negotiation
  - Added migration guide (v1→v2 differences)
  - Clarified v1 as legacy, v2 as recommended

### ✅ Phase 5: Testing & Validation (Completed)
- [x] Run full test suite: All 471 tests pass with race detection
- [x] Run regression test: 10,000 hands @ 430 hands/second, zero errors
- [x] Run smoke test: 5 hands with mixed bot types, working correctly

## References

- [Protocol Specification](../docs/websocket-protocol.md)
- [Aragorn Investigation Results](https://github.com/lox/pokerforbots/pull/16) - Documents impact of incorrect action mapping (458 invalid actions, -213.6 BB/100 performance loss)
- [Hand Runner Implementation](../internal/server/hand_runner.go)
- [Action Validation Logic](../internal/game/betting.go#L54-L87)

## Verify

```bash
task test
task lint

# Verify built-in bots work
pokerforbots spawn --spec "calling-station:2,random:2,aggressive:2" --hand-limit 1000

# Regression test with complex bot
pokerforbots spawn --spec "complex:6" --hand-limit 10000 --seed 42

# Integration test with external bot (manual)
# Update test bot to send generic "call" and "raise" actions, verify normalization logs
```

## Completion Summary

**Status:** ✅ All phases complete, ready for production

**Test Results:**
- 471 unit tests passing with race detection
- 10,000 hand regression: 430 hands/second, zero errors
- Zero invalid actions observed in testing

**Performance Impact:**
- Eliminates 458 invalid actions from incorrect check/call, bet/raise mapping
- Expected improvement: +213.6 BB/100 for bots migrating from incorrect v1 implementation
- No performance degradation for correctly implemented v1 bots

**Breaking Changes:**
- None for existing bots (v1 protocol still supported)
- v2 is opt-in via `protocol_version: "2"` in Connect message
- Server defaults to v2 if `protocol_version` omitted (new bots get simplified protocol by default)

**Next Steps:**
1. Aragorn team testing with existing bot (v1 compatibility validation)
2. Aragorn team migration to v2 (eliminate invalid actions)
3. Monitor production metrics for protocol usage and error rates
4. Consider deprecation timeline for v1 (not urgent, maintain for backward compatibility)

Commit message:

fix: default to protocol v1 for backward compatibility
Change default protocol version from v2 to v1 to ensure existing bots
without protocol_version field continue working without modifications.

Issue: Old bots don't send protocol_version, so they were defaulted to v2.
When they sent v1 actions (check, bet), the server would reject them.

Solution: Default to v1 for maximum backward compatibility. New bots
explicitly opt-in to v2 by sending protocol_version: "2".

Testing:
- Verified v1 snapshot bot (complex-20250924) works correctly
- Mixed v1/v2 game: 100 hands, 608 hands/second, zero errors
- All 471 tests pass with race detection

Breaking changes: None - this improves backward compatibility

plans/protocol-v2-four-action-simplification.md, after:

# Protocol v2: Simplified 4-Action System

- Owner: @lox
- Status: completed
- Updated: 2025-10-01
- Tags: protocol, breaking-change, dx, bot-framework
- Scope: internal/server/hand_runner.go, internal/game/betting.go, internal/client/client.go, sdk/bots/*, docs/websocket-protocol.md
- Risk: medium
- Effort: M

## TL;DR

- Problem: Bots must reimplement context-dependent action name mapping (check vs call, bet vs raise, allin detection) causing catastrophic performance loss when wrong.
- Approach: Simplify protocol to 4 actions (fold, call, raise, allin); server interprets based on game state and logs semantically (check/bet/call/raise).
- Expected outcome: Bot developers focus on strategy rather than protocol bookkeeping; cleaner API with one-time breaking change during v1.0 window.

## Goals

- Simplify protocol to 4 actions: fold, call, raise, allin (remove check, bet from wire protocol)
- Update valid_actions to only send simplified vocabulary (never send check/bet)
- Server normalizes client actions to semantic names (check/bet/call/raise) for internal processing and logging
- Maintain semantic precision in logs, hand histories, and player_action broadcasts for analysis
- Update all internal bots and CLI client to use simplified protocol
- Update documentation to reflect v2 protocol
- Clean breaking change during v1.0 adoption window

## Non-Goals

- Modifying hand history analysis or logging format (logs continue showing semantic check/bet/call/raise)
- Changing other server-to-client messages (hand_start, player_action, etc. unchanged)

## Design Evolution

**Initial approach:** Clean breaking change with no version negotiation.

**Final approach:** After discussion, implemented protocol version negotiation to support gradual migration:
- v2 (recommended): Simplified 4-action protocol for new bots
- v1 (default, legacy): Full 6-action protocol for backward compatibility with existing bots
- Server handles both protocols simultaneously via `bot.ProtocolVersion` field

This allows existing bots to continue working (default v1) while new bots explicitly opt-in to v2.

## Plan

- Step 1: Write failing tests for GetValidActions() returning simplified vocabulary
- Step 2: Update GetValidActions() in betting.go to emit simplified action vocabulary (call/raise instead of check/bet)
- Step 3: Write failing tests for normalizeAction() covering all edge cases
- Step 4: Implement normalizeAction() in hand_runner.go that maps client actions to semantic names
- Step 5: Update convertAction() to use normalizeAction() and handle semantic action names
- Step 6: Update all 4 internal bots to use simplified protocol (call/raise instead of check/bet)
- Step 7: Update CLI client validation and shortcuts to use simplified protocol
- Step 8: Update docs/websocket-protocol.md with v2 protocol and migration guide
- Step 9: Run full test suite and regression tests to verify correctness

## Acceptance Criteria

- GetValidActions() returns only simplified vocabulary: fold, call, raise, allin (never check or bet)
- normalizeAction() correctly maps: call+to_call=0→check, raise+to_call=0→bet, raise+amount>=stack→allin
- player_action broadcasts continue using semantic names (check/bet shown in logs and to other bots)
- All unit tests pass after updates
- All integration tests pass after updates
- CLI client can send simplified actions and validates against new valid_actions
- Regression test: pokerforbots spawn --hand-limit 10000 shows zero invalid actions
- Old action names ("check", "bet") explicitly rejected with clear error message
- Documentation includes migration guide for external bots (Aragorn)

## Risks & Mitigations

- Risk: Wire-level breaking change affects all external bots — Mitigation: Aragorn team already aligned; simple migration (find-replace check→call, bet→raise)
- Risk: valid_actions change breaks existing client-side validation — Mitigation: Update CLI client in same commit; comprehensive testing before merge
- Risk: Server complexity increase — Mitigation: Clean separation between wire protocol (4 actions) and game semantics (6 actions); Red→Green→Refactor with tests first

## Tasks

### ✅ Phase 1: Core Protocol Implementation (Completed)
- [x] Update plan to reflect v2 protocol breaking change and address Codex feedback
- [x] Write failing tests for GetValidActions() returning simplified vocabulary
- [x] Update GetValidActions() in internal/game/betting.go to pass tests
- [x] Write failing tests for normalizeAction() covering all edge cases
- [x] Implement normalizeAction() in internal/server/hand_runner.go to pass tests
- [x] Update convertAction() to use normalization and handle semantic actions
- [x] Update sdk/bots/callingstation to use call/raise
- [x] Update sdk/bots/random to use call/raise
- [x] Update sdk/bots/aggressive to use call/raise
- [x] Update sdk/bots/complex to use call/raise

### ✅ Phase 2: Version Negotiation Infrastructure (Completed)
- [x] Add protocol_version field to Connect message (protocol/messages.go)
- [x] Update Bot struct to store ProtocolVersion (internal/server/bot.go)
- [x] Server validates and stores protocol version on connect (internal/server/server.go)
- [x] Default to v1 if protocol_version omitted (backward compatibility)

### ✅ Phase 3: Dual Protocol Support (Completed)
- [x] Implement normalizeActionV1() for legacy bots
  - Accept old vocabulary: check, bet, call, raise, fold, allin
  - Direct 1:1 mapping to game.Action
  - Location: internal/server/hand_runner.go

- [x] Implement normalizeActionV2() (rename current normalizeAction)
  - Renamed normalizeAction to normalizeActionV2
  - Handles call→check, raise→bet normalization

- [x] Update convertAction() to dispatch based on bot.ProtocolVersion
  - Implemented version-based dispatch
  - v1 bots use normalizeActionV1
  - v2 bots use normalizeActionV2

- [x] Update sendActionRequest() to convert valid_actions by protocol version
  - Implemented convertActionsForProtocol helper
  - v2 bots receive simplified vocabulary (call/raise)
  - v1 bots receive semantic vocabulary (check/bet/call/raise)

- [x] Add tests for dual normalization
  - TestNormalizeActionProtocolV1 - tests v1 action handling
  - TestNormalizeActionProtocolV2 - tests v2 action handling
  - TestConvertActionsForProtocol - tests valid_actions conversion

### ✅ Phase 4: Documentation & Client Updates (Completed)
- [x] Update SDK client to send protocol_version: "2" (sdk/client/bot.go)
- [x] Update CLI client to use protocol v2 (internal/client/client.go)
  - Send protocol_version in connect
  - Updated keyboard shortcuts (k→call, b→raise for v2 compatibility)
- [x] Update docs/websocket-protocol.md
  - Documented protocol_version field
  - Explained version negotiation
  - Added migration guide (v1→v2 differences)
  - Clarified v1 as legacy, v2 as recommended

### ✅ Phase 5: Testing & Validation (Completed)
- [x] Run full test suite: All 471 tests pass with race detection
- [x] Run regression test: 10,000 hands @ 430 hands/second, zero errors
- [x] Run smoke test: 5 hands with mixed bot types, working correctly

## References

- [Protocol Specification](../docs/websocket-protocol.md)
- [Aragorn Investigation Results](https://github.com/lox/pokerforbots/pull/16) - Documents impact of incorrect action mapping (458 invalid actions, -213.6 BB/100 performance loss)
- [Hand Runner Implementation](../internal/server/hand_runner.go)
- [Action Validation Logic](../internal/game/betting.go#L54-L87)

## Verify

```bash
task test
task lint

# Verify built-in bots work
pokerforbots spawn --spec "calling-station:2,random:2,aggressive:2" --hand-limit 1000

# Regression test with complex bot
pokerforbots spawn --spec "complex:6" --hand-limit 10000 --seed 42

# Integration test with external bot (manual)
# Update test bot to send generic "call" and "raise" actions, verify normalization logs
```

## Completion Summary

**Status:** ✅ All phases complete, ready for production

**Test Results:**
- 471 unit tests passing with race detection
- 10,000 hand regression: 430 hands/second, zero errors
- Zero invalid actions observed in testing

**Performance Impact:**
- Eliminates 458 invalid actions from incorrect check/call, bet/raise mapping
- Expected improvement: +213.6 BB/100 for bots migrating from incorrect v1 implementation
- No performance degradation for correctly implemented v1 bots

**Breaking Changes:**
- None for existing bots (v1 protocol is the default)
- v2 is opt-in via `protocol_version: "2"` in Connect message
- Server defaults to v1 if `protocol_version` omitted for maximum backward compatibility

**Next Steps:**
1. Aragorn team testing with existing bot (v1 compatibility validation)
2. Aragorn team migration to v2 (eliminate invalid actions)
3. Monitor production metrics for protocol usage and error rates
4. Consider deprecation timeline for v1 (not urgent, maintain for backward compatibility)
