docs/spawner.md, before:

# Bot Spawner Documentation

The bot spawner is a library and tool for managing bot processes in the PokerForBots ecosystem. It provides a clean separation between the poker server (game logic) and bot orchestration (process management).

## Architecture

The spawner consists of:

1. **Library Package** (`sdk/spawner`) - Public API for bot process management
2. **Config Package** (`sdk/config`) - Environment variable handling for bots
3. **Spawner Tool** (`cmd/spawner`) - Orchestrator with embedded server (runs server in-process, not as subprocess)
4. **Integration Points** - Used by regression tester and other tools (all use embedded server)

## SDK Packages

The spawner is part of the PokerForBots SDK, providing public APIs for bot development:

### Available SDK Packages

- **`sdk/spawner`** - Process management for bot spawning
- **`sdk/config`** - Environment variable configuration for bots
- **`sdk/client`** - WebSocket client for bot connections
- **`sdk/analysis`** - Hand analysis utilities
- **`sdk/classification`** - Card and hand classification

### Import in Your Code

```go
import (
    "github.com/lox/pokerforbots/sdk/spawner"
    "github.com/lox/pokerforbots/sdk/config"
)
```

## Using the Spawner Tool

### Basic Usage

```bash
# Run with default configuration (6 calling station bots)
go run ./cmd/spawner

# Specify bot types and counts using --spec
go run ./cmd/spawner --spec "calling-station:2,random:2,aggressive:2"

# Run specific bot commands
go run ./cmd/spawner --bot-cmd "go run ./sdk/examples/complex" --count 4

# Combine specifications and custom bots
go run ./cmd/spawner --spec "calling-station:2" --bot-cmd "./my-bot" --count 2
```

### Configuration Options

- `--addr` - Server address (default: `localhost:0` for random port)
- `--spec` - Bot specification string (e.g., `"calling-station:2,aggressive:3"`)
- `--bot-cmd` - External bot command (can be specified multiple times)
- `--count` - Number of instances for each --bot-cmd
- `--hand-limit` - Stop after N hands (0 for unlimited)
- `--seed` - Seed for deterministic testing
- `--write-stats` - Write statistics to file on exit
- `--print-stats` - Print statistics to console on exit

### Bot Specifications

The `--spec` format supports these built-in bot types:

- `calling-station` - Always calls/checks, never raises
- `random` - Makes random valid actions
- `aggressive` - Raises 70% of the time
- `complex` - Advanced strategy bot

Example specifications:
```bash
--spec "calling-station:3"              # 3 calling station bots
--spec "random:2,aggressive:1"          # 2 random, 1 aggressive
--spec "calling-station:2,complex:2"    # Mixed strategy game
```

## Using the Spawner Library

### In Your Own Tools

```go
import "github.com/lox/pokerforbots/sdk/spawner"

// Create a spawner instance
sp := spawner.New("ws://localhost:8080/ws", logger)

// Define bot specifications
specs := []spawner.BotSpec{
    {
        Command: "go",
        Args:    []string{"run", "./sdk/examples/complex"},
        Count:   2,
        Env: map[string]string{
            "CUSTOM_ENV": "value",  // Additional env vars
        },
    },
    {
        Command: "./my-custom-bot",
        Count:   3,
    },
}

// Spawn all bots
if err := sp.Spawn(specs...); err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
}

// Later: stop all bots
sp.StopAll()
```

### Bot Configuration via SDK

Bots can use the SDK config package to parse environment variables:

```go
import "github.com/lox/pokerforbots/sdk/config"

func main() {
    // Parse configuration from environment
    cfg, err := config.FromEnv()
    if err != nil {
        log.Fatal(err)
    }

    // Use the configuration
    serverURL := cfg.ServerURL  // From POKERFORBOTS_SERVER
    seed := cfg.Seed            // From POKERFORBOTS_SEED
    botID := cfg.BotID          // From POKERFORBOTS_BOT_ID
    gameID := cfg.GameID        // From POKERFORBOTS_GAME

    // Initialize bot with config...
}
```

The spawner automatically sets these environment variables:
- `POKERFORBOTS_SERVER` - WebSocket URL for connection
- `POKERFORBOTS_SEED` - Random seed for deterministic testing
- `POKERFORBOTS_BOT_ID` - Unique bot identifier
- `POKERFORBOTS_GAME` - Target game ID (defaults to "default")

### Embedded Server Architecture

**Important**: Both the spawner tool (`cmd/spawner`) and regression tester use an **embedded server** by importing `internal/server` directly, rather than spawning the server as a subprocess. This approach provides:

- **Better performance** - No subprocess overhead
- **Direct control** - Can call methods directly on the server instance
- **Cleaner shutdown** - Direct access to server for graceful termination
- **No external dependencies** - Doesn't require `go` command or source code access

The regression tester uses an embedded server with the spawner library:

```go
// Create embedded server
srv := server.NewServer(logger, rng, server.WithConfig(config))
listener, _ := net.Listen("tcp", "localhost:0")
go srv.Serve(listener)

// Create spawner for bot management
serverURL := fmt.Sprintf("ws://%s/ws", listener.Addr())
botSpawner := spawner.New(serverURL, logger)

// Spawn bots
botSpawner.Spawn(specs...)

// Wait for game completion
<-srv.DefaultGameDone()

// Clean up
botSpawner.StopAll()
srv.Shutdown(ctx)
```

## Environment Variables

The spawner sets these environment variables for spawned bots:

- `POKERFORBOTS_SERVER` - WebSocket server URL
- `POKERFORBOTS_SEED` - Seed for deterministic RNG
- `POKERFORBOTS_BOT_ID` - Unique bot identifier
- `POKERFORBOTS_GAME` - Target game ID (default: "default")

## Process Management

The spawner handles:

- **Lifecycle** - Start, monitor, and stop bot processes
- **Output** - Prefix bot output with process ID for debugging
- **Cleanup** - Graceful shutdown with SIGTERM, forceful after timeout
- **Error Handling** - Log process exits and errors

## Migration from Server Flags

The server previously managed bots directly via flags like `--npcs` and `--bot-cmd`. This functionality has moved to the spawner:

### Old Way (Deprecated)
```bash
# Server managed bots directly
./server --npcs 6 --npc-calling 3 --npc-aggressive 3
```

### New Way
```bash
# Start server (pure game logic)
./server --addr localhost:8080

# In another terminal, use spawner for bots
./spawner --server ws://localhost:8080/ws --spec "calling-station:3,aggressive:3"
```

Or use the spawner with embedded server:
```bash
# Spawner starts server internally and manages bots
./spawner --spec "calling-station:3,aggressive:3" --hand-limit 1000
```

## Integration Examples

### Regression Testing

The regression tester uses the spawner library for bot management:

```go
// Start embedded server with spawner
orchestrator := regression.NewOrchestrator(config, healthMonitor)
orchestrator.StartServer(ctx, serverConfig) // Uses embedded server + spawner

// The orchestrator internally:
// 1. Creates embedded server
// 2. Uses spawner to launch bot processes
// 3. Waits for hand limit
// 4. Collects statistics
// 5. Cleans up everything
```

### Benchmarking

```bash
# Quick benchmark with spawner tool
time ./spawner --spec "calling-station:6" --hand-limit 1000 --seed 42

# With statistics output
./spawner --spec "complex:6" --hand-limit 10000 --write-stats bench.json
```

### Development Workflow

```bash
# Test your bot against various strategies
./spawner --bot-cmd "go run ./my-bot" --spec "aggressive:3,calling-station:2"

# Deterministic testing with seed
./spawner --seed 12345 --bot-cmd "./my-bot" --spec "complex:5" --hand-limit 100
```

## Best Practices

1. **Use embedded server mode** for testing - faster and more reliable than subprocess
2. **Set seeds** for deterministic testing and reproduction
3. **Monitor statistics** to track bot performance over time
4. **Clean shutdown** - always call StopAll() to terminate bot processes
5. **Resource limits** - be mindful of system resources when spawning many bots

## Troubleshooting

### Bots not connecting
- Check the server URL is correct
- Ensure bots support the POKERFORBOTS_SERVER environment variable
- Verify network connectivity

### Process cleanup issues
- The spawner sends SIGTERM for graceful shutdown
- After 5 seconds, it sends SIGKILL
- Check for zombie processes if bots don't terminate

### Performance considerations
- Each bot is a separate OS process
- Consider system limits when spawning many bots
- Use batch sizes appropriate for your hardware

Commit message:

feat: track response latency in regression stats

docs/spawner.md, after:

# Bot Spawner Documentation

The bot spawner is a library and tool for managing bot processes in the PokerForBots ecosystem. It provides a clean separation between the poker server (game logic) and bot orchestration (process management).

## Architecture

The spawner consists of:

1. **Library Package** (`sdk/spawner`) - Public API for bot process management
2. **Config Package** (`sdk/config`) - Environment variable handling for bots
3. **Spawner Tool** (`cmd/spawner`) - Orchestrator with embedded server (runs server in-process, not as subprocess)
4. **Integration Points** - Used by regression tester and other tools (all use embedded server)

## SDK Packages

The spawner is part of the PokerForBots SDK, providing public APIs for bot development:

### Available SDK Packages

- **`sdk/spawner`** - Process management for bot spawning
- **`sdk/config`** - Environment variable configuration for bots
- **`sdk/client`** - WebSocket client for bot connections
- **`sdk/analysis`** - Hand analysis utilities
- **`sdk/classification`** - Card and hand classification

### Import in Your Code

```go
import (
    "github.com/lox/pokerforbots/sdk/spawner"
    "github.com/lox/pokerforbots/sdk/config"
)
```

## Using the Spawner Tool

### Basic Usage

```bash
# Run with default configuration (6 calling station bots)
go run ./cmd/spawner

# Specify bot types and counts using --spec
go run ./cmd/spawner --spec "calling-station:2,random:2,aggressive:2"

# Run specific bot commands
go run ./cmd/spawner --bot-cmd "go run ./sdk/examples/complex" --count 4

# Combine specifications and custom bots
go run ./cmd/spawner --spec "calling-station:2" --bot-cmd "./my-bot" --count 2
```

### Configuration Options

- `--addr` - Server address (default: `localhost:0` for random port)
- `--spec` - Bot specification string (e.g., `"calling-station:2,aggressive:3"`)
- `--bot-cmd` - External bot command (can be specified multiple times)
- `--count` - Number of instances for each --bot-cmd
- `--hand-limit` - Stop after N hands (0 for unlimited)
- `--seed` - Seed for deterministic testing
- `--write-stats` - Write statistics to file on exit
- `--print-stats` - Print statistics to console on exit

### Latency Metrics

When the server runs with statistics enabled (the default for the spawner tool),
each player's detailed stats now include response-time telemetry:

- `responses_tracked` — number of action requests that produced a valid response.
- `avg_response_ms`, `p95_response_ms`, `max_response_ms` — mean, 95th percentile,
  and worst-case latencies measured in milliseconds.
- `response_std_ms` — standard deviation of response times.
- `response_timeouts`, `response_disconnects` — counts of timeouts or disconnects
  that occurred while waiting for an action.

These fields are printed in the console summary (when `--print-stats` is used) and
are written to JSON files produced by `--write-stats`. Use them to verify bots stay
comfortably below the 100 ms action deadline during long regression runs.

### Bot Specifications

The `--spec` format supports these built-in bot types:

- `calling-station` - Always calls/checks, never raises
- `random` - Makes random valid actions
- `aggressive` - Raises 70% of the time
- `complex` - Advanced strategy bot

Example specifications:
```bash
--spec "calling-station:3"              # 3 calling station bots
--spec "random:2,aggressive:1"          # 2 random, 1 aggressive
--spec "calling-station:2,complex:2"    # Mixed strategy game
```

## Using the Spawner Library

### In Your Own Tools

```go
import "github.com/lox/pokerforbots/sdk/spawner"

// Create a spawner instance
sp := spawner.New("ws://localhost:8080/ws", logger)

// Define bot specifications
specs := []spawner.BotSpec{
    {
        Command: "go",
        Args:    []string{"run", "./sdk/examples/complex"},
        Count:   2,
        Env: map[string]string{
            "CUSTOM_ENV": "value",  // Additional env vars
        },
    },
    {
        Command: "./my-custom-bot",
        Count:   3,
    },
}

// Spawn all bots
if err := sp.Spawn(specs...); err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
}

// Later: stop all bots
sp.StopAll()
```

### Bot Configuration via SDK

Bots can use the SDK config package to parse environment variables:

```go
import "github.com/lox/pokerforbots/sdk/config"

func main() {
    // Parse configuration from environment
    cfg, err := config.FromEnv()
    if err != nil {
        log.Fatal(err)
    }

    // Use the configuration
    serverURL := cfg.ServerURL  // From POKERFORBOTS_SERVER
    seed := cfg.Seed            // From POKERFORBOTS_SEED
    botID := cfg.BotID          // From POKERFORBOTS_BOT_ID
    gameID := cfg.GameID        // From POKERFORBOTS_GAME

    // Initialize bot with config...
}
```

The spawner automatically sets these environment variables:
- `POKERFORBOTS_SERVER` - WebSocket URL for connection
- `POKERFORBOTS_SEED` - Random seed for deterministic testing
- `POKERFORBOTS_BOT_ID` - Unique bot identifier
- `POKERFORBOTS_GAME` - Target game ID (defaults to "default")

### Embedded Server Architecture

**Important**: Both the spawner tool (`cmd/spawner`) and regression tester use an **embedded server** by importing `internal/server` directly, rather than spawning the server as a subprocess. This approach provides:

- **Better performance** - No subprocess overhead
- **Direct control** - Can call methods directly on the server instance
- **Cleaner shutdown** - Direct access to server for graceful termination
- **No external dependencies** - Doesn't require `go` command or source code access

The regression tester uses an embedded server with the spawner library:

```go
// Create embedded server
srv := server.NewServer(logger, rng, server.WithConfig(config))
listener, _ := net.Listen("tcp", "localhost:0")
go srv.Serve(listener)

// Create spawner for bot management
serverURL := fmt.Sprintf("ws://%s/ws", listener.Addr())
botSpawner := spawner.New(serverURL, logger)

// Spawn bots
botSpawner.Spawn(specs...)

// Wait for game completion
<-srv.DefaultGameDone()

// Clean up
botSpawner.StopAll()
srv.Shutdown(ctx)
```

## Environment Variables

The spawner sets these environment variables for spawned bots:

- `POKERFORBOTS_SERVER` - WebSocket server URL
- `POKERFORBOTS_SEED` - Seed for deterministic RNG
- `POKERFORBOTS_BOT_ID` - Unique bot identifier
- `POKERFORBOTS_GAME` - Target game ID (default: "default")

## Process Management

The spawner handles:

- **Lifecycle** - Start, monitor, and stop bot processes
- **Output** - Prefix bot output with process ID for debugging
- **Cleanup** - Graceful shutdown with SIGTERM, forceful after timeout
- **Error Handling** - Log process exits and errors

## Migration from Server Flags

The server previously managed bots directly via flags like `--npcs` and `--bot-cmd`. This functionality has moved to the spawner:

### Old Way (Deprecated)
```bash
# Server managed bots directly
./server --npcs 6 --npc-calling 3 --npc-aggressive 3
```

### New Way
```bash
# Start server (pure game logic)
./server --addr localhost:8080

# In another terminal, use spawner for bots
./spawner --server ws://localhost:8080/ws --spec "calling-station:3,aggressive:3"
```

Or use the spawner with embedded server:
```bash
# Spawner starts server internally and manages bots
./spawner --spec "calling-station:3,aggressive:3" --hand-limit 1000
```

## Integration Examples

### Regression Testing

The regression tester uses the spawner library for bot management:

```go
// Start embedded server with spawner
orchestrator := regression.NewOrchestrator(config, healthMonitor)
orchestrator.StartServer(ctx, serverConfig) // Uses embedded server + spawner

// The orchestrator internally:
// 1. Creates embedded server
// 2. Uses spawner to launch bot processes
// 3. Waits for hand limit
// 4. Collects statistics
// 5. Cleans up everything
```

### Benchmarking

```bash
# Quick benchmark with spawner tool
time ./spawner --spec "calling-station:6" --hand-limit 1000 --seed 42

# With statistics output
./spawner --spec "complex:6" --hand-limit 10000 --write-stats bench.json
```

### Development Workflow

```bash
# Test your bot against various strategies
./spawner --bot-cmd "go run ./my-bot" --spec "aggressive:3,calling-station:2"

# Deterministic testing with seed
./spawner --seed 12345 --bot-cmd "./my-bot" --spec "complex:5" --hand-limit 100
```

## Best Practices

1. **Use embedded server mode** for testing - faster and more reliable than subprocess
2. **Set seeds** for deterministic testing and reproduction
3. **Monitor statistics** to track bot performance over time
4. **Clean shutdown** - always call StopAll() to terminate bot processes
5. **Resource limits** - be mindful of system resources when spawning many bots

## Troubleshooting

### Bots not connecting
- Check the server URL is correct
- Ensure bots support the POKERFORBOTS_SERVER environment variable
- Verify network connectivity

### Process cleanup issues
- The spawner sends SIGTERM for graceful shutdown
- After 5 seconds, it sends SIGKILL
- Check for zombie processes if bots don't terminate

### Performance considerations
- Each bot is a separate OS process
- Consider system limits when spawning many bots
- Use batch sizes appropriate for your hardware
